# Generate lookup table for reciprocal computation.

## Description

When using Newton's Method to compute the reciprocal of a floating point number we need an initial guess for the reciprocal. This repository has two different code examples which generate the necessary table. The table generated by these programs has 1,024 entries. Each entry is a 7-bit number. When using the IEEE 754 binary floating point formats one can compute the index into the table by extracting the 10 most significant bits of the number's significand field. (This assumes the value is a "Normal" number; "Subnormal" numbers need to have their significands normalized and exponents adjusted, accordingly.) The 7-bit value returned from the table needs to be prepended with a leading 1 bit; this creates an 8-bit initial guess, which becomes our x0 value for the Newton's Method algorithm. The initial guess gets stored in a 9-bit field; the reasons why are covered in the video cited below.

The code is a quick and dirty hack. It IS NOT production quality code. Use at your own risk.

The code is explained in the video series [Building an FPU in Verilog](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLlO9sSrh8HrwcDHAtwec1ycV-m50nfUVs).
See the video *Building an FPU In Verilog: Floating Point Division, Part 4*.

The code is used in the video series [Building an FPU in Verilog](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLlO9sSrh8HrwcDHAtwec1ycV-m50nfUVs).
See the video *Building an FPU In Verilog: Floating Point Division, Part 5*.

## Manifest

|   Filename   |                        Description                                  |
|--------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| README.md    | This file.                                                          |
| recipX0      | Python 3 script to generate table of x0 values for computing the reciprocal of an IEEE 754 binary floating point number. |
| reciprocalX0.cpp | C++ program to generate table x0 value for computing the reciprocal of an IEEE 754 binary floating point number. |

## Copyright

:copyright: Chris Larsen, 2022
